[RELENG-7422] 📝 Add documentation (#42)
scality/gh-actions-exporter: docs/metrics-analysis-prometheus/prometheus.md

# Prometheus

## Introduction

> Prometheus is integrated with our `gh_actions_exporter` repository,

Reviewer: Prometheus is not integrated. The user is expected to have an existing prometheus installation and configure it to pull metrics from the available endpoint. 

Specify where the metrics are exposed

Reviewer: When configuring Prometheus to pull metrics from an exporter, you need to specify the url. The `url` itself will depend on the user's install but the `/metrics` path will always be the same, so add this information to help users.

Author: Done!

enabling the export of GitHub Actions metrics.

Prometheus is a powerful open-source monitoring and alerting system that allows
users to collect, store, and analyze time-series data. In this guide, we will
explore how to effectively utilize Prometheus to analyze GitHub Actions.

## Understanding Prometheus Queries

> The idea here is not to recreate the entire Prometheus documentation; we will
> simply discuss the key points to get you started easily without getting lost in
> the plethora of information available on the Internet. I will redirect you to
> the [documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/)
> if you want to develop deeper.

Reviewer: Here you are pointing to the official main doc for prometheus, but the section is called prometheus query, so I added both. I let you figure out what you want to achieve.
```suggestion
To learn about Prometheus itself, checkout the official
[documentation](https://prometheus.io/docs/introduction/overview/),
as well as [querying Prometheus](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/querying/basics/)
```

Author: I'll keep both, this is really good!

To proceed, I will take a typical query and break it down, discussing other
potentially useful information to cover.

Let's examining this example query:

```bash

> topk(5, sum(increase(github_actions_job_cost_count_total{repository=~"$repository", runner_type=~"$runner_type", repository_visibility=~"$repository_visibility", cloud=~"$cloud"}[$__range])) by (repository) > 0)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
topk(5, sum(increase(github_actions_job_cost_count_total{}[5m])) by (repository) > 0)
```

You can add that the labels are available for filtering if needed. and add another example with hardcoded values as `$variable`

Author: Done

```

This query retrieves data related to GitHub Actions job costs and
provides the top 5 repositories with the highest cumulative cost
within a specified time range.

1. The query starts with the topk(5, ...) function, which returns the
   top 5 values based on a specified metric or condition.
2. The sum(increase(...)) part of the query calculates the cumulative
   sum of the specified metric. In our example, it calculates the
   cumulative sum of the github_actions_job_cost_count_total metric,
   representing the total job cost count.
3. Within the curly braces {}, we apply filters to narrow down the
   data based on specific criteria. The `$variable` refers to the filter

>    variables that you can specify at the top of the page.

Reviewer: `$variable` is only available in grafana, either remove it or specify it.

4. The `[$__range]` part specifies the time range for the query.
   It uses the `$__range` variable, which represents the selected time

>    range in Grafana.

Reviewer: `$__range` is only available in grafana  so either specify that, or change `$__range` to `5m` or something similar.

Author: Done

5. The `by (repository)` clause groups the data by the repository field.
   This enables the query to calculate the cost sum for each repository individually.
6. The expression `> 0` filters the query results to only include
   repositories with a value greater than zero.

It's also possible to combine different queries in Grafana. For example, one
query dividing by another.

Lastly, it is also important to understand `__interval`. `__interval`
represents the time interval between data points, whereas `__range`

> represents the selected time range for the query.

Reviewer: Those are only available in Grafana, either remove or specify that.

Author: Done

## Introduction

In order to collect and analyze GitHub Actions metrics, users are expected
to have an existing Prometheus installation and configure it to pull metrics.

> Prometheus is a powerful open-source monitoring and alerting system that allows

Reviewer: I feel like those three lines deserve to be first sentence of the introduction. No?

Author: True

users to collect, store, and analyze time-series data. In this guide, we will
explore how to effectively utilize Prometheus to analyze GitHub Actions.

To collect and analyze GitHub Actions metrics, users need to have an existing

> Prometheus installation and configure it to pull metrics. This requires
> specifying the Prometheus URL with the `/metrics` path.

Reviewer: Not the prometheus url, but the exporter.
```suggestion
Prometheus installation and configure it to pull metrics
from the `/metrics` endpoint of the exporter.
```

Author: Done, thanks!

   sum of the specified metric. In our example, it calculates the
   cumulative sum of the github_actions_job_cost_count_total metric,
   representing the total job cost count.
3. The `[5m]` part specifies the time range for the query.

> 4. The `by (repository)` clause groups the data by the repository field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. The `by (repository)` clause groups the data by the repository label.
```

   This enables the query to calculate the cost sum for each repository individually.
5. The expression `> 0` filters the query results to only include
   repositories with a value greater than zero.

!!! info

>    You can also use Grafana, it enhances the visualization of Prometheus data and

Reviewer: Same trunk story as explained above, leaving suggestion to not forget the change
```suggestion

   You can also use Grafana, it enhances the visualization of Prometheus data and
```

> !!! info
>    You can also use Grafana, it enhances the visualization of Prometheus data and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
!!! tip
   Using Grafana enhances the visualization of Prometheus data and
```

>    provides powerful querying capabilities. Within Grafana, you can apply filters,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   provides powerful querying capabilities. Within Grafana, apply filters,
```

   cumulative sum of the github_actions_job_cost_count_total metric,
   representing the total job cost count.
3. The `[5m]` part specifies the time range for the query.
4. The `by (repository)` clause groups the data by the repository label.
   This enables the query to calculate the cost sum for each repository individually.
5. The expression `> 0` filters the query results to only include
   repositories with a value greater than zero.

<!-- trunk:ignore

> 

Reviewer: Conversation solved, but I still see the trunk ignore.

> 

Author: I forgot to push, my bad

!!! info

      Using Grafana enhances the visualization of Prometheus data and
      provides powerful querying capabilities. Within Grafana, apply filters,
      combine queries, and utilize variables for dynamic filtering. It's important
      to understand `__interval` (time interval between data points) and `__range`
      (selected time range) when working with Prometheus data in Grafana. This
      integration enables efficient data exploration and analysis for better

>       insights and decision-making.

Reviewer: Was this applied? Why is it tagged as solved?

>       insights and decision-making.

Author: Sorry, it's finally done now

> -->

Reviewer: Conversation solved, but I still see the trunk ignore.
